# Introduction to Prediction and Forecasting Crime Rates with Gaussian Processes

One of the major problems around the world is crime. One proposed definition for crime is a harmful act not only to some individual but also to a community, society or the state. Such acts are forbidden and punishable by law and have made us trying to figure out what is causing this phenomenon. A single crime case probably arises from the individual thought of a person, for that reason, it seems impossible to forecast who will commit a crime, but can the rate of crime cases in a selected location be predicted?

In the last decades the number of crime cases relative to population size has increased, as opposed to expectations. Due to the increase in the amount of crimes, the police found itself under pressure and in searching after alternatives to minimize crime cases. One idea that has come up and is in a great development momentum is predicting crimes based on analyzed previous crime cases.

In order to decrease crime rates, the police have established an extensive database that was based on large amounts of data collected from previous crimes, and cataloged it by location, time and type of crime. This database will be used in our project, which propose an algorithm that will be used to predict crime cases. The most common method of crimes prediction is to assume that "hotspots", which are found with the kernel strength estimate, will remain in the short term. Other attempts included prediction using extrapolation based on time series.

This project focuses on the geostatistical map of crimes and tries to create a framework that will be flexible and based on Gaussian processes for modeling and short-term prediction of space and time crime with three objectives: prediction and evaluation, spatial focus and temporary focus. The model designed to be flexible data-driven, it does not take into account the dynamics of crime, it takes the amount of crimes as data for the statistical problem of accurate forecasting models criminal counts in space and time. The model is quite general and can be transformed to use other spatiotemporal data.

This project will use the Gaussian process model and examine which covariance function gives the most accurate prediction results. In order to do the examination, we will study the rate of crimes in the previous years, including the last year given, and then predict the crime rate of the last given year with a number of different covariance functions, the last step is to check which of the covariance functions gives the most accurate prediction. In practice, we will study the crime rate of 2013-2017, then predict the last year that is given 2017 several times, each time with other covariance function and compare it to the actual data until we reach the covariance function that will give the most accurate prediction.

# More Information available in the Project book & User manual files.
